Test Plan is the top-level container that defines how your performance test will run. It acts like the blueprint of the entire test, organizing all components such as threads, requests, listeners, and configurations.
Thread Group is the component that simulates virtual users and controls how many users will send requests to the server and how they behave during the test.
Number of Threads (Users)
Represents the number of virtual users.
Example:
50 threads = 50 users accessing the application.
2. Ramp-Up Period
Time JMeter takes to start all users.
Example:
Threads = 10
Ramp-up = 10 seconds
Meaning:
1 user starts every second.
3. Loop Count
How many times each user executes the test.
Example:
Loop Count = 5
10 users × 5 loops = 50 total executions
1. Same User on Each Iteration
Meaning:
When this option is enabled, the same virtual user (thread) is used for every loop iteration instead of creating a fresh user state each time.
What happens
Cookies
Sessions
Authentication data
are maintained across iterations.
Example
If a user logs in during iteration 1:
Iteration 2 will continue with the same session.
Use Case
Useful when testing real user behavior, such as:
Login → Browse → Logout
Shopping cart flows
Without this option, each iteration behaves like a new user session
2. Delay Thread Creation Until Needed
Meaning:
JMeter does not create all threads at the start of the test. Instead, it creates them gradually when they are required according to the ramp-up period.
Benefit
Saves memory
Improves performance when running large load tests.
Example
Threads = 1000
Ramp-up = 100 seconds
JMeter will create threads only when needed during ramp-up, not all 1000 immediately.
3. Specify Thread Lifetime
Meaning:
Allows you to control how long each thread runs using time instead of loop count.
You can define:
Start Time
End Time
Duration
Startup Delay
Example
Duration = 5 minutes
Startup Delay = 10 seconds
Result:
Test starts after 10 seconds
Runs for 5 minutes
What It Means
Test starts after 10 seconds
When you click Start, JMeter waits for 10 seconds.
No virtual users (threads) send requests during this time.
Test runs for 5 minutes
After the 10-second delay, the threads start executing requests.
They continue running for 5 minutes.
Test automatically stops
After 5 minutes, JMeter stops all threads automatically, even if loops are not finished.
Config Elements added directly under the Test Plan (not inside a Thread Group) are global configurations.
This means they apply to all Thread Groups and Samplers in the Test Plan unless overridden locally.
1. User Defined Variables
Used to create global variables.
Example:
server = example.com
port = 443
Then you can use them in requests like:
${server}
${port}
2. HTTP Request Defaults
Used to set default values for HTTP requests.
Exmple:
Server Name: example.com
Protocol: https
Now every HTTP request automatically uses these defaults, so you don't have to repeat them.
3.HTTP Header Manager
Adds common headers to all requests.
Example headers:
Content-Type: application/json
Authorization: Bearer token
This avoids adding headers to every request manually.
4. HTTP Cookie Manager
Handles cookies automatically like a browser.
Use case:
Session management
Login flows
Example:
When a user logs in, the session cookie is stored and used in the next requests.
5. CSV Data Set Config
Used for data-driven testing.
Example CSV file:
username,password
user1,pass1
user2,pass2
Each thread can read different data from the CSV file.
Listeners are components that collect, process, and display the results of a performance test.
In simple words:
Listeners show what happened during the test execution.
They help you analyze:
Response time
Success or failure of requests
Throughput
Error percentage
View Results Tree is a Listener that shows detailed information about every request and response during the test execution.
Response time
Response code (200, 404, 500)
Response message
Thread name
Latency
Bytes received
Timers are components that add a delay between requests during test execution.
They are used to simulate real user behavior because real users do not send requests continuously without any pause.
Without timers:
JMeter sends requests as fast as possible.
This creates unrealistic load.
With timers:
Requests are sent after some delay, just like real users browsing a website.
Example real scenario:
User opens homepage
Waits 3 seconds
Clicks login
Waits 5 seconds
Opens dashboard
Timers help simulate this think time.
How Timers Work
Timers are added inside a Thread Group.
They affect the samplers (requests) that are in the same scope.
1. Constant Timer
Adds a fixed delay between requests.
Example:
Delay = 2000 ms
Result:
JMeter waits 2 seconds before the next request.
2. Uniform Random Timer
Adds random delay within a range.
Example:
Constant delay = 2000 ms
Random delay = 1000 ms
Actual delay = 2000 to 3000 ms
This simulates more realistic user behavior.
Gaussian Random Timer is used to add a random delay between requests following a normal (Gaussian) distribution.
What Gaussian Random Timer Does
It pauses the thread for a time calculated like this:
Delay = Constant Delay Offset + Random Delay
Where the Random Delay follows a Gaussian (normal) distribution.
So most delays will be around the average, with fewer very small or very large delays.
🔹 Parameters
1️⃣ Deviation (in milliseconds)
Standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution.
Controls how much the delay varies.
Higher value → more variability.
Example:
Deviation = 2000
2️⃣ Constant Delay Offset (in milliseconds)
Minimum base delay added to every request.
Example:
Constant Delay Offset = 3000
🔹 Example
If you configure:
Deviation = 2000
Constant Delay Offset = 3000
Then delays will roughly be:
3000 ms ± random gaussian(2000)
Typical delays might look like:
3500 ms
2800 ms
4100 ms
3200 ms
Most values will cluster around ~3000–5000 ms.
Constant Throughput Timer is used to control the rate of requests (throughput) so that the test sends a specific number of requests per minute.
Instead of adding a fixed delay like other timers, it dynamically calculates the delay between requests to maintain the target throughput.
It ensures your test runs at a target requests-per-minute rate.
Example:
If you set 60 samples/min, JMeter tries to send 1 request every second.
It automatically adjusts waiting time between requests so the average throughput stays close to the configured value.
1️⃣ Target Throughput (samples per minute)
The number of requests you want per minute.
Example:
Target Throughput = 120
Meaning:
120 requests per minute
= 2 requests per second
2️⃣ Calculate Throughput Based On
This determines how JMeter distributes the throughput across threads.
Options include:
1. This thread only
Each thread tries to reach the target throughput individually.
Example:
Target = 60
Threads = 10
Result:
60 req/min × 10 threads = 600 req/min
2. All active threads (shared)
The target throughput is shared across all threads.
Example:
Target = 60
Threads = 10
Result:
Total = 60 req/min
Each thread sends part of it
This is most commonly used.
3. All active threads in current thread group
Throughput is shared within the thread group only.
4. All active threads (shared) in all groups
Throughput shared across all thread groups.
Target Throughput
It is not the number of users.
It is how fast requests are sent overall.
PreProcessors are components that execute before a sampler (request) is sent to the server.
They are used to modify the request, prepare data, or set variables before the request runs.
🔹 Simple Definition
PreProcessor = Code or logic that runs before a request is executed.
User Parameters PreProcessor
Allows each thread (user) to use different parameter values.
Example:
username = user1
password = pass1
Each user gets different credentials.
HTTP URL Re-writing Modifier
Automatically adds session IDs to URLs if needed.
Example:
;jsessionid=ABC123
Used when sessions are passed through URLs instead of cookies.
BeanShell PreProcessor
Runs BeanShell scripting before the request.
Example:
vars.put("randomNumber", String.valueOf(Math.random()));
Creates a variable before the request.
JSR223 PreProcessor
Runs Groovy scripts before the sampler.
Example:
vars.put("timestamp", System.currentTimeMillis().toString())
Used for advanced scripting.
What is a Preprocessor?
Definition: A Preprocessor is a JMeter component that runs before a sampler (HTTP request, JDBC request, etc.) executes.
Purpose: To modify or prepare the request dynamically before it is sent to the server.
Key point: Preprocessors do not send requests themselves — they only set up or change the sampler.
What are Listeners?
Listeners are components in JMeter that receive the results of samplers (like HTTP requests, JDBC requests, etc.).
They display, save, or process the results of your tests.
You can think of them as “reporting and analysis tools” within JMeter.
Main Types of Listeners
View Results Tree
Shows detailed results for each sampler, including request, response, headers, and response code.
Very useful for debugging test scripts.
Summary Report
Shows aggregate metrics like number of samples, average response time, min/max, throughput, and error %.
Good for quick performance overview.
Aggregate Report
Similar to Summary Report but provides more statistics like standard deviation.
Useful for detailed performance analysis.
Graph Results
Plots response times and throughput on a line graph.
Gives a visual idea of performance trends.
View Results in Table
Displays results in a tabular format, including sample, response time, and status.
Good for exporting data or reviewing specific requests.
Simple Data Writer
Writes results directly to a CSV or XML file without GUI.
Useful for large-scale tests to reduce memory usage.
Backend Listener
Sends test metrics to external systems like InfluxDB or Grafana.
Ideal for real-time dashboards in production-like environments.
jp@gc – Response Times Over Time (plugin)
Plugin listener to show response time trends over the test duration.
Useful for spotting gradual performance degradation.

What is an Assertion?

Definition: An Assertion in JMeter is a component that validates the response from a sampler (HTTP request, JDBC request, etc.).

Purpose: To check if the server returned the expected result.

They help ensure your application is functionally correct while performing performance testing.
Types of Assertions in JMeter

Response Assertion

Most commonly used.

Checks response text, code, headers, or patterns.

Example: Verify GET /user/{username} response contains "username":"user1".

Duration Assertion

Validates that a request completes within a certain time.

Example: POST /user must respond in less than 2000 ms.

Size Assertion

Checks response size in bytes.

Example: Ensure product list response is at least 1000 bytes.

XML Assertion

Validates that response is valid XML.

Example: SOAP API responses follow correct XML schema.

HTML Assertion

Checks HTML responses for errors or valid tags.

Example: Web page response does not contain <error> tag.

JSON Assertion / JSON Path Assertion

Checks JSON responses.

Example: Response JSON has "status":"success" or "id": 101.

XPath Assertion

Validates XML or HTML response using XPath.

Example: Ensure <user><id>101</id></user> exists in response.

JSR223 Assertion

Custom script (Groovy) to validate response dynamically.

Example: Fail the sampler if a JSON field does not meet a business rule.

BeanShell Assertion

Older scripting assertion using BeanShell.

Example: Complex validation logic for legacy scripts.

What is a Sampler?

A Sampler is a component in JMeter that actually sends requests to the server.

Samplers are the core of your test plan, because they perform the actions you want to test — like HTTP requests, database queries, or FTP transfers.

Common Types of Samplers in JMeter

HTTP Request Sampler

Send HTTP/HTTPS GET, POST, PUT, DELETE requests.

Example:

POST /user to create a new Petstore user

GET /user/{username} to retrieve user details

FTP Request Sampler

Upload/download files from an FTP server.

JDBC Request Sampler

Execute SQL queries against a database.

SOAP/XML-RPC Request Sampler

Send SOAP web service requests.

Java Request Sampler

Execute custom Java code.

JMS Publisher / Subscriber Sampler

Test messaging systems (JMS queues/topics).

TCP Sampler

Send TCP packets to servers for testing custom protocols.

What is a Postprocessor?

Definition: A Postprocessor in JMeter is a component that executes after a sampler runs.

Purpose: To extract, manipulate, or process the response data from a request before moving on to the next request.

Key point: Postprocessors do not send requests themselves; they work with the response returned by the sampler.

Why Use Postprocessors?

Extract dynamic data for next requests

Example: Extract a userId from POST /user response to use in GET /user/{userId}

Handle correlations

Many APIs return tokens, session IDs, or dynamic IDs. Postprocessors extract these for later use.

Process data for assertions or reporting

Example: Extract values to validate with assertions or pass to another sampler.

Types of Postprocessors

Regular Expression Extractor

Extract values from response using regex patterns.

Example: Extract "id": 101 from JSON response.

JSON Extractor

Extract values from JSON responses using JSON Path.

Example: Extract "username" from {"id":101,"username":"user1"}

XPath Extractor

Extract values from XML or HTML responses using XPath expressions.

Example: Extract <userId>101</userId> from XML response.

Boundary Extractor (older, less common)

Extract values between start and end strings.

JSR223 Postprocessor

Custom script (Groovy) to manipulate response or generate variables dynamically.

Example: Convert response JSON to uppercase before next request.

Debug PostProcessor

Prints all variables and properties to the log for debugging.


What is JSR223?

Definition:

JSR223 is a scripting interface in JMeter that allows you to write custom scripts using languages that implement the JSR223 specification, such as Groovy, JavaScript, Beanshell, JEXL, or Python (via plugins).

Most commonly used language: Groovy, because it is fast, efficient, and fully integrated with Java.

Where it’s used:

Preprocessor → modify request before sending

Postprocessor → extract/manipulate response after request

Assertion → validate response with custom logic

Sampler (JSR223 Sampler) → send request or perform custom action

Timer → create dynamic wait times

How Timers Work in JMeter

**Timers in JMeter add a delay before a sampler executes.

Scope: They affect samplers for each thread independently, not the start of other threads.

Important: Timers do not control the start order of threads (users).



