What is an API?
An API (Application Programming Interface) is:
A contract that defines how two software components communicate using structured requests and responses.
Endpoints (URLs or function names)
Methods (operations allowed)
Input format
Output format
Authentication rules
Error codes
It does not define implementation.
It defines how to interact with a system.
How APIs Work (Web API Example)
Client Sends a Request
A client (browser, mobile app, backend service) sends:
HTTP Method (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE)
URL (endpoint)
Headers
Optional body (JSON)
Example request:
POST /users HTTP/1.1
Host: api.example.com
Content-Type: application/json
Authorization: Bearer token123

{
  "name": "John",
  "email": "john@email.com"
}
2️⃣ Server Processes the Request
The API server:
Validates authentication
Validates input
Executes business logic
Reads/writes database
Creates response
3️⃣ Server Sends Response
Example response:

HTTP/1.1 201 Created
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "id": 101,
  "name": "John",
  "email": "john@email.com"
}
What APIs Work With
APIs interact with:
1. Databases
MySQL
PostgreSQL
MongoDB
API receives request → queries database → returns result.
2. Authentication Systems
JWT
OAuth
Session tokens
Example: When logging in via Google, your app uses OAuth APIs.
3. External Services
Apps call APIs from:
Stripe (payments)
Twilio (SMS)
OpenAI (AI models)
4. Frontend Applications
React
Angular
Mobile apps
IoT devices
Frontend → API → Backend → Database → API → Frontend
A web service is a way for different applications, often on different machines or platforms, to communicate over the Internet using standard protocols. It’s basically a system that exposes functionality over the web so other systems can use it.
A web service allows a program (client) to talk to another program (server) using the web (usually HTTP/HTTPS).
The server exposes some functions or data.
The client sends a request and receives a response in a structured format.
What is a REST API?
A REST API is a way for clients (like web or mobile apps) to communicate with servers over HTTP using standard methods and URLs (endpoints).
It’s stateless: the server does not remember previous requests from the client.
It operates on resources, which are any kind of data you can access or manipulate (e.g., users, orders, products).
A REST API exposes resources over HTTP and uses standard HTTP methods to operate on those resources.
REST Principles (Technical Constraints)
A system is RESTful if it follows these rules:
1️⃣ Client–Server Architecture
Frontend and backend are separate.
2️⃣ Stateless
Each request must contain all required information.
The server does NOT store client session state between requests.
Example:
Every request includes authentication token.
3️⃣ Cacheable
Responses should define whether they can be cached.
4️⃣ Uniform Interface
Standardized way to interact:
Resources identified by URLs
Use HTTP methods
Use standard status codes
Structured data (usually JSON)
5️⃣ Layered System
Client doesn’t know if it’s talking directly to the server or through:
Load balancer
API gateway
Proxy
CDN
What is HTTP?
HTTP stands for HyperText Transfer Protocol.
It is an application-layer protocol used for communication between clients and servers on the web.
It defines:
How requests are sent
How responses are structured
How data is transferred
HTTP is the foundation of the web.
Where HTTP Sits in Networking
HTTP works on top of:
TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)
IP (Internet Protocol)
Layer model (simplified):
Application Layer → HTTP
Transport Layer   → TCP
Internet Layer    → IP
So HTTP does not move packets itself — it uses TCP to transport data reliably.
How HTTP Works (Step-by-Step)
1️⃣ Client Sends Request
Example: Browser requests a webpage from Google
Request:
GET / HTTP/1.1
Host: google.com
User-Agent: Chrome
2️⃣ Server Sends Response
Response:
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: text/html
Content-Length: 1256
<html> ... </html>
Structure of HTTP Request
An HTTP request contains:
1. Request Line
GET /users HTTP/1.1
Method (GET, POST, etc.)
Path
HTTP version
2. Headers
Metadata
Content-Type: application/json
Authorization: Bearer token123
3. Optional Body
Used in POST, PUT, PATCH

{
  "name": "John"
}
Structure of HTTP Response
1. Status Line
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
2. Headers
Content-Type: application/json
3. Body
Data returned from server
An endpoint in a REST API is a specific URL (route) where a client can access a resource or perform an action on a server.
Think of it as the exact address where an API service can be reached.
An endpoint is a specific URL within an API where a client can send a request.
An endpoint consists of:
Base URL → https://api.example.com
Path → /users
HTTP Method → GET, POST, PUT, DELETE
All three together define a unique endpoint.
It tells:
📍 Where the request goes (URL)
⚙ What action to perform (HTTP method like GET, POST, etc.)
GET https://api.example.com/users/1
In REST (Representational State Transfer), a resource is any object, data, or concept that can be identified and accessed via a URL.
In simple terms:
A resource is what the API is about.
 Simple Definition
A resource is:
A piece of data
Identified by a URI (Uniform Resource Identifier)
Manipulated using HTTP methods (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE)
Resource = The actual data/concept (e.g., a user)
Representation = How it is sent to the client (JSON, XML, etc.)
A resource in REST is any identifiable data entity that can be accessed and manipulated through a URI using HTTP methods.
URI (Uniform Resource Identifier)
A URI is a string that identifies a resource.
It can identify a resource by:
Its location
Its name
Or both
 URI is the broader concept.
Example:
https://example.com/users/1
mailto:someone@example.com
urn:isbn:9780141036144
All of these are URIs.
🔎 2️⃣ URL (Uniform Resource Locator)
A URL is a type of URI that tells you:
Where the resource is located
How to access it (protocol)
Example:
https://example.com/users/1
It includes:
Protocol → https
Domain → example.com
Path → /users/1
👉 A URL provides the location of a resource.
URI – Uniform Resource Identifier
A URI is a generic identifier for a resource.
It tells you “what” the resource is, but not necessarily how to access it.
Every URL is a URI, but not every URI is a URL.
Example URIs:
urn:isbn:0451450523 → Identifies a book by its ISBN (no location, just identity)
https://example.com/books/123 → Also a URI (and a URL)
2. URL – Uniform Resource Locator
A URL is a type of URI that specifies the location and how to access the resource.
It gives both identity + access method (scheme like HTTP/HTTPS, plus location).
Example URLs:
https://example.com/books/123 → Access over HTTPS
ftp://ftp.example.com/file.txt → Access via FTP
A URN (Uniform Resource Name) is a type of URI that names a resource uniquely but does not tell you where or how to access it. Think of it as a permanent, location-independent identifier.
URN = “what something is”
URL = “where and how to get it
A URN is useful when you want a stable identifier that doesn’t change even if the resource moves.
urn:<namespace>:<unique-identifier>
urn: → literal prefix indicating it’s a URN
namespace: → category or type of identifier (like ISBN for books)
unique-identifier: → the actual resource ID
Path Parameter
Definition: A variable segment of the URI path that is part of the hierarchical structure of the resource.
Purpose: Used to identify a specific resource within a collection.
Path parameters are part of the URI path and uniquely identify a resource, while query parameters are key-value pairs appended to the URI to filter, sort, or modify the resource representation.”
